(Transcribed by TurboScribe.ai. Go Unlimited to remove this message.) From prehistory to our days, France has gone
through centuries of evolution, conflicts and discoveries.
On this European territory, Celtic tribes have left
room for a powerful medieval kingdom, before becoming
the modern nation that we know today.
France, of art, of science and of freedom,
has profoundly marked the world by its culture
and its ideas.
In this video, we will travel through time
to discover how this country has transformed, how
it has grown and how it has inspired
entire generations.
Welcome to the global history of France, a
fascinating journey to the heart of the past,
from the Middle Ages to the contemporary era.
This territory was already inhabited by ancient peoples.
About a million years ago, the first humans
came to earth, which we now call France.
Its first inhabitants lived in caves, hunted to
survive and used stone to make their tools.
Alaska, Chauvet and Millau, incredible ruptured paintings bear
witness to their lives, their beliefs and their
imaginations.
These works, over 17,000 years old, show
bison, horses and deer, symbols of the nature
that surrounded them.
Little by little, prehistoric men learn to master
fire, to make clothes and build stronger shelters.
Then, a decisive change occurs, man becomes sedentary.
During the Neolithic, peoples began to cultivate the
earth and raise animals.
Villages are formed, tools become more refined and
pottery appears.
This transition from a nomadic life to a
stable life marks a silent revolution in the
history of humanity.
It was also at this time that the
mysterious megalithic monuments emerged, such as those of
Carnac, in Brittany.
Alignments of giant stones, drawn with fascinating precision,
whose exact meaning remains a mystery.
Were these places of worship, observatories or symbols
of the link between men and the stars?
Towards the end of prehistory, new peoples settle.
The Celts.
Organized into tribes, they develop a rich culture
made of warriors, druids and talented artisans.
They love the forces of nature, worship trees
and rivers and form powerful and hierarchical societies.
Their villages, called Opida, become the first fortified
centers of what will be, ten years later,
Gaul.
Prehistory comes to an end when Rome, the
most powerful empire in the ancient world, turns
its gaze west, towards this country of forests,
rivers and warriors, Gaul.
Thus ends the long prehistoric night and opens
a new chapter.
Only, France enters history.
After the end of the Roman Inquiry, Gaul
enters a new era, the Middle Ages.
In the 20th century, a people from the
North imposes itself.
The Franks.
Their king, Clovis, unifies the tribes and founds
the Merovingian dynasty.
By converting to Christianity around the year 500,
Clovis gives birth to a lasting alliance between
the monarchy and the Church.
This moment marks the real beginning of France.
After Clovis, the Carolingians take power.
The most famous of them, Charlemagne, reigns over
a huge empire.
He encourages education, culture and religion and dreams
of bringing back the greatness of Rome.
His coronation in Rome in the year 800,
by Pope Leon III, symbolizes the birth of
a new Christian empire in Europe.
But after his death, his empire is divided.
The invasions begin again.
Vikings from the North, Saracens from the South,
Hungarians from the East.
Fear and insecurity mark this era.
It is then that feudalism is born.
A system where the lords protect their lands
and their vassals in exchange for loyalty and
service.
Strong castles are built everywhere, symbols of power
and defense.
The peasants, they, work in the fields, often
living in poverty, under the protection of their
lord.
Medieval life is hard, but also deeply spiritual.
Monasteries become places of knowledge and prayer.
The monks copy the ancient manuscripts there and
preserve the knowledge of the ancient world.
Thanks to them, culture survives through the centuries.
From the 11th century, France is transforming.
The islands grow, trade is reborn, and a
new class of merchants appears.
At the same time, the kings seek to
strengthen their power.
Philip Auguste enlarged the kingdom, built the Louvre
and founded the University of Paris.
Saint Louis, just and pious king, becomes a
symbol of wisdom and faith.
But the Middle Ages is also the time
of crusades.
Thousands of knights leave for the Holy Land,
driven by faith and the desire for glory.
These expeditions deeply mark Europe and open roads
to the East.
In the cities, cathedrals rise to the sky.
In Paris, Notre-Dame becomes the jewel of
the Gothic style, symbol of the Christian soul
of the Middle Ages.
However, this era is not without drama.
In the 14th century, the Black Feast ravages
Europe, killing millions of people.
Then, the Hundred Years' War breaks out between
France and England.
For more than a century, the kingdom is
torn apart.
In this chaos arises a heroine, Jeanne d
'Arc.
Young girl from Dongrémy, she hears voices ordering
her to save France.
At the head of the armies, she gives
hope to a whole people and allows the
coronation of King Charles VII in Reims.
Captured by the English, she is judged and
burned alive in Rouen in 1431.
But her courage and her faith make her
an eternal legend, symbol of resistance and freedom.
At the end of the Middle Ages, France
comes out weakened but united.
The kings regain control of the country, the
cities prosper, and a new era is announced.
The Renaissance.
After centuries of faith, wars and chivalry, the
Middle Ages ends, leaving behind the foundations of
a powerful kingdom, a common language and a
new identity.
A new era begins, the Renaissance.
Inspired by the arts and sciences from Italy,
France transforms.
Kings like François I encourage artists, architects and
writers.
It is the time of the Châteaux de
la Loire, of humanism and great discoveries.
Printmaking spreads, ideas circulate faster, and knowledge becomes
a force.
Léonard de Vinci himself finds refuge in France,
a symbol of this openness to culture and
progress.
But the country also knows dark times.
Religious wars break out between Catholics and Protestants,
dividing the nation for nearly a century.
The massacre of Saint Barthélemy in 1572 remains
one of the most tragic episodes of this
period.
In 1598, King Henry IV ends the conflict
by proclaiming the Edi of Nantes, which guarantees
religious tolerance.
He restores peace and begins the reconstruction of
the kingdom.
Then comes the 17th century, the century of
King Louis XIV.
He embodies absolute monarchy.
Since his palace in Versailles, he centralizes all
the power in his hands and makes France
shine throughout Europe.
Under his reign, arts, literature and architecture know
an unprecedented flash.
Molière, Racine, Lully and the Nôtre make the
Court a center of culture and prestige.
But this greatness has a price.
The people impoverish themselves and wars ruin their
kingdom.
In the 18th century, the Enlightenment appears.
Philosophers such as Voltaire, Rousseau and Montesquieu question
the established order.
They talk about freedom, justice and equality.
Their ideas spread throughout society and announce a
major upheaval.
This upheaval breaks out in 1789, the French
Revolution.
The people rise up against injustice and start
a monarchy.
The Bastille falls, the Declaration of Human Rights
is proclaimed and a new war breaks out,
that of freedom and citizenship.
But the revolution is also marked by violence.
Terror ensnares France before an ambitious man emerges,
Napoleon Bonaparte.
General Briand takes power in 1799 and is
crowned emperor in 1804.
He reforms the administration, law and education and
conquers a large part of Europe.
But after years of war, he is defeated
in Waterloo in 1815.
The 19th century sees alternate empires, republics and
monarchies.
Industrialization transforms the country, the iron roads extend
and Paris becomes a modern capital under Haussmann.
Finally, in the 20th century, France faces the
two world wars, knows resistance, liberation and gradually
builds the democracy we know today.
From the Renaissance to the Revolution, from kings
to citizens, from faith to reason, modern France
was born in the tumult but also in
the hope of a